.TH TOTPGATED 1 2026-05-30 "totpgate" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
totpgated \- Single Packet Authorization daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B totpgated
\fB\-\-secret\fR \fIsecret\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtotpgated\fR listens on a UDP port for TOTP tokens. When a valid token
is received it temporarily inserts an nftables rule allowing the sender's
IP to connect to the protected TCP port. Invalid tokens trigger per-IP
rate limiting with exponential backoff.
.P
After binding the UDP socket the daemon drops privileges to
an unprivileged user (\fB\-\-user\fR/\fB\-\-group\fR, defaults
nobody/nogroup).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-secret\fR \fIsecret\fR
Shared secret. Base32 by default; prefix with \fBhex:\fR or \fBb64:\fR
for other encodings. (required unless \fB\-\-secret-file\fR given)
.TP
\fB\-\-secret-file\fR \fIpath\fR
Read shared secret from a file. The file content follows the same
encoding rules as \fB\-\-secret\fR. Mutually exclusive with
\fB\-\-secret\fR. A warning is emitted if the file is world-readable.
.TP
\fB\-\-port\fR \fI[ip:]port\fR
UDP listen port. May be given multiple times to listen on different
addresses or ports. When prefixed with an IP (e.g. \fB0.0.0.0:2222\fR,
\fB[::]:2222\fR) the daemon binds only to that address; without a prefix
it binds to both \fB0.0.0.0\fR and \fB[::]\fR (dual-stack, default: 2222).
.TP
\fB\-\-target-port\fR \fIport\fR
TCP application port to protect. (default: 22)
.TP
\fB\-\-timeout\fR \fIseconds\fR
Ephemeral rule lifetime. (default: 30, max: 86400)
.TP
\fB\-\-min-block\fR \fIseconds\fR
Minimum rate-limit block duration. (default: 300)
.TP
\fB\-\-max-block\fR \fIseconds\fR
Maximum rate-limit block duration. (default: 86400)
.TP
\fB\-\-rate-limit\fR \fIn\fB/\fIwindow\fR
Maximum failed attempts per sliding window. (default: 5/60)
.TP
\fB\-\-user\fR \fIuser\fR
Drop privileges to this user after binding socket. (default: nobody)
.TP
\fB\-\-group\fR \fIgroup\fR
Use this group after dropping privileges. (default: nogroup)
.TP
\fB\-\-interface\fR \fIname\fR
Network interface (e.g. \fBeth0\fR) to restrict firewall rules to. When
set, the default-drop rule and every ephemeral accept rule include an
nftables \fBiifname\fR match so that only traffic arriving on that
interface is affected.
.TP
\fB\-\-foreground\fR
Log to stderr instead of syslog.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
Display usage and exit.
.SH AUTH PACKET FORMAT
The client sends a UDP datagram containing:
.P
.RS
\fItoken\fR
.RE
.P
\fItoken\fR
6 decimal digits (TOTP).  The daemon accepts 6 to 8 digits and rejects
any packet with trailing data.  The target port and rule lifetime are
controlled exclusively by the daemon's \fB\-\-target-port\fR and
\fB\-\-timeout\fR options.
.SH RATE LIMITING
Per-IP failure tracking with exponential backoff. After the configured
number of failures within the sliding window the IP is blocked for
\fB\-\-min-block\fR seconds. Each subsequent block cycle doubles the
duration, capped at \fB\-\-max-block\fR. A successful auth clears the
failure count.
.SH FIREWALL
The daemon manages an nftables table named \fBtotpgate\fR with two chains:
.TP
\fBinput\fR (base hook, priority \-10)
\fR[\fBiifname <iface>\fR] ct state established,related accept;
\fR[\fBiifname <iface>\fR] jump allowed_ips;
\fR[\fBiifname <iface>\fR] tcp dport <target> drop.
.TP
\fBallowed_ips\fR (regular chain)
\fR[\fBiifname <iface>\fR] ip saddr <client> tcp dport <target> accept
(auto-expires after \fB\-\-timeout\fR seconds).

The \fBiifname\fR match is included only when \fB\-\-interface\fR is
given.  The \fBinput\fR chain first accepts established/related traffic,
then jumps to \fBallowed_ips\fR for dynamic allow rules, and finally
drops unmatched SYN packets to the target port.  Non-target traffic
implicitly passes due to the base chain's default accept policy.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
SIGTERM, SIGINT
Cleanly remove firewall rules and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.P
\fBtotpgated\fR exits 0 on clean shutdown, 1 on error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR totpgate (1)
